--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-- aseSlab 0.1 by kidmarsc.at // kidmarscat.itch.io                           --
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

aseSlab is a voxel suite for Aseprite that allows you to live preview your pixel
 art as a 3D voxel model for easy creation of voxel art right from the program 
itself, with multiple useful features such as:

• Custom voxel shape, size, and borders
• Two projection modes: orthographic and perspective.
• Full 3D rotation, with mouse support
• Depth map rendering
• ... and more!

Also included with the suite are sample projects to use as the basis for your 
own voxel models; examples for both live animation previewing and multi-layered 
rendering; and also, as a bonus, a Python script for converting Aseprite exports
 from .png to .vox (using Ken Silverman's Slabspri/Slab6 voxel standard). 

: What It Does:
– aseSlab will display the currently selected sprite in full 3D as a series of
   floating squares or "voxels", with multiple settings to choose from, to 
  control the preview and test the resulting voxel model.
– The preview can also be rendered to sprite at any time, mostly preserving 
  the preview's settings, on a transparent background and with the original 
  sprite's palette.

: How to use it:
– Open the script from the "File > Scripts" menu. This will bring the dialog 
  up with a preview of the sprite in 3D. You can move the preview around using 
  the left mouse button if needed.
– Select "Render all layers" if the Aseprite project has been set-up with 
  multiple layers in mind. This means that multiple 3D elements can be drawn 
  separately and on top of each other, which will then be converted to flat 
  slices in the live render.
– In the "Sprite settings" tab, select "Set the current sprite as the render 
  target" if it isn't selected already by default. You can also use the grid 
  settings or current selection to define the model's width and height.
– You may also want to adjust the tile size and the amount of tiles per column
   and row. The voxel model will be rendered by drawing each tile from back to 
  front, going left to right and top to bottom, with the last frame in the grid 
  representing the front of the model.
– In "Voxel settings", you can tweak the size, padding and roundness of the 
  squares that make up the voxel model. These settings will also affect the 
  "Render to Sprite" export.
– In "Camera settings", you can change the projection type, distance, and 
  rotation, to test how the model will look from different angles. This can also
   be controlled with the right and middle mouse buttons.
– In "Render settings", you can toggle whether to draw borders around the 
  voxels; whether to use the currently selected brush background color as the 
  image background; to hide inner voxels in unoptimized models for faster render
   times; and to display the voxels as a depth map by displaying their distance 
  to the camera as different shades of gray.
– In "Manual Input" you can set the values of multiple options that are 
  otherwise only controllable using sliders, such as the camera rotation and 
  voxel size.
– And finally, you can refresh the preview if it hasn't updated automatically;
   hide or show the settings for full screen preview; reset the view, which is 
  useful for when the model moves outside the preview; reset the rotation with 
  one click; render the current preview to sprite; get information about the 
  current render (amount of voxels, and render time); and finally, exit the 
  dialog.

: Other useful stuff:
– We have bundled in the "examples" subfolder three Aseprite projects 
  showcasing features such as live animation previewing, multi-layer rendering, 
  and a stress test for how the script will behave when the amount of voxels is 
  in the five digits.
– We have also bundled in the "samples" subfolder another three Aseprite 
  projects for models such as a sphere, cube and pyramid, to use as the basis 
  for your own voxel creations.
– Finally, in the "extra" subfolder, we have included a Python script that can
   export to a .vox file, compatible with voxel art software such as MagicaVoxel
   and Slab6. For more information, read png2vox.txt. Be aware that the script 
  requires Python 3.10 or newer installed on your system.

: Important:
– For models that aren't optimized, i.e. they contain pixel data that will not
   be visible on the 3D render, it's very much encouraged for "hide inner 
  voxels" to be turned on. However, the opposite is also true: The script may 
  take more time trying to cull the voxels than actually rendering them when the
   model is already optimized, in which case it's better to turn the setting 
  off.
– The rendering has been optimized to the limit of what a single Lua script 
  can do within the constraints of the Aseprite API. However, do know that the 
  graphics environment in which the preview is rendered is severely lacking in 
  optimization, and that this accounts for most of the slow down when the voxel 
  count reaches five digits.
– There are multiple bugs described in the script itself, which are outside of
   the script's control due to being the result of the Aseprite API, and also 
  the underlying code of the Aseprite application itself. None of them should 
  break the script's functionality, but do check out the provided help pop-ups 
  in the program to learn more about these bugs and how to work with them. As 
  soon as I find a solution around them, they will be implemented and available 
  online for paying users.
– Finally, do understand that the goal of this script is to serve as a live 
  preview for drawing voxels in Aseprite, and that any further features, such as
   more advanced rendering of voxels, exporting to popular voxel formats, and 
  elaborate voxel art animations such as turntable rotations, should be made 
  with more appropriate software, such as the aforementioned MagicaVoxel, 
  Qubicle, Blender, etc.

: Setup:
– In Aseprite, go to "File > Scripts > Open Scripts" Folder. This should open 
  an Explorer window at "<Aseprite program folder>/scripts".
– Copy the file aseSlab.lua to this folder and in "File > Scripts" select 
  Rescan Scripts Folder.
– The script should now be available for use.

In case of a bug, or any other kind of unintentional behavior, feel free to 
contact me at 
    kidmarscat [at] gmail [dot] com
or leave a comment on the aseSlab download page,
    kidmarscat.itch.io/aseslab

: On a final note...
I've only ever released my scripts for free online, but this project took me the
 better part of a month, taking time away from more lucrative endeavors I could 
have done instead. And I could have kept it as an internal tool like some other 
scripts I've developed, except I'm hoping that, by releasing the project online,
 it may result in Aseprite itself implementing these features out-of-the-box for
 all users, or perhaps even helping to directly interface between Aseprite and 
any of the popular voxel programs available today.

Developing scripts for Aseprite has mostly been a thankless effort, especially 
due to the total lack of support from the Aseprite developers in maintaining the
 API and fixing bugs that affect all script developers. In an ideal world, these
 kind of features would be available already — the existence of this script 
proves how easy it would be to implement them, if anyone gave a crap.

Until this happens, I'm choosing to release this as a paid download, to get 
something back for all the time and effort invested on a project like this, 
1000+ lines of code and all. If you choose to buy it, feel free to share it 
around with friends, but please don't let it go any further than that, if you 
can.

Do know that, in the end, it's less about the money than it is about making a 
point, with the hopes that one day this project is made obsolete by Aseprite 
itself.

: ChangeLog
Date     Version  What changed
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2024-09  0.1      First release, including every essential feature considered 
                  for the project.
